Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Center. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lops, and
today I'm joined again by Doctor Michael Cook. He's
class of 1943 university professor of Near Eastern studies
at Princeton University. And this is the second part
of our conversation about his book A History of
the Muslim World from its origins to the Dawn
of Modernity. So Dr. Cook, welcome back to the
show. It's always a pleasure to everyone.
Glad to be back.
OK, so let's start from where we left off
last time we were starting to talk about the
caliphate. How did the caliphate expand to Spain in
the west and to Sindh in the east?
Right, I think um by way of background. Let
me remind you that um by the early 8th
century, the caliphate is the only imperial game in
town. I mean, you won't find another empire anywhere
west of China. So it doesn't have formidable enemies.
But on the other hand, it's already expanded a
long way, so that any new conquests are up
against distance, and also often geographical barriers. So against
that background, if we take Spain, Uh, Spain, you
have the Visigothic Kingdom. It's usually quite a strong
state, but at the time in question, 7-Eleven, it's
in a state of civil war, so it's weak.
That makes it easy. The geographical barrier, apart from
distance is the sea at the space of the
Straits of Gibraltar, but it's not a very broad
sea, and the Muslims get across it. But you
can also see here that they're getting towards the
end of the line. Um, I mean, in Spain,
they don't consolidate their power in the north of
Spain. They don't advance to the Pyrenees, which would
be the natural barrier. And the result is that
there are, there is a continuing Christian political and
military presence in the north of Spain, and that
will eventually turn into the Reconquista. Um, IN Sindh,
it's a somewhat similar story. There is no formidable
state there. They don't, you know, confront a really
dangerous enemy. But on the other hand, getting to
Sindh, it's a long way away, and it's, it's
tough to get there. You have um, you have
to either go through a very mean desert, or
else you have to go through formidable mountains. And
the result is that while the Muslims conquer Sindh
and even part of the Punjab in this early
8th century period, they don't go any further. So
the Ganges, which is maybe the richest part of
India, is beyond their frontiers until the 11th century
when the Turks come in.
OK, so we have the provinces of Spain, North
Africa, Egypt, Arabia, and Iran. Did it also extend
to territories that are now part of Afghanistan and
Pakistan?
Yes, right, and Pakistan, we've already dealt with that
sin. And Afghanistan. So I the major Muslim conquest
in Afghanistan is the city of Bal. Which at
the present day is, I think, pretty much a
ruin, but close to Mazar i Sharif in northern
Afghanistan. So they take that in this early period.
But If, for example, we take Kabul, which is
to the southwest of Baal, they don't get there
until the 9th century. And when they do get
there, it's not a caliphal army, it's the army
of one of the successor states in Iran. So
here again, we see Muslim conquest kind of petering
out in the 8th century. It's gone as far
as it can go.
Was the caliphate stable or did it go through
periods where there was internal conflict through civil war
and rebellion and foreign invasions?
Right, I mean, like in any state or any
pre-modern state, it goes through bad patches. So if
you have, for example, um, A civil war between
two brothers, each claiming the caliphate that lasts from,
I think, 811 to 819. So that's a lot
of chaos. And you have all sorts of other
rebellions. If we come down to the 860s, we
have a period of people usually refer to it
as anarchy. It's the Turkish slave soldiers making trouble
at the center because they're not being paid regularly.
And so yes, and it's ups and downs. But,
uh, Until the first half of the 10th century,
each time you have a down, you then have
an up again. But it's in the early decades
of the 10th century that you have a definitive.
Down And after that, the Abbasid state, whatever it
is, is never again going to be an empire.
Mhm
So it is at this time that we see
the emergence of Islamic civilization. What characterizes such a
civilization?
Right, I would say first, um, the centrality of
the Arabic language. I mean, this is a language
that, uh, until then, until the 7th century was
not a language of high culture anywhere. Uh No,
in the 7th, in the middle of the 7th
century, there is only one book in Arabic, namely
the Koran. By the time we get to the
10th century, the later 10th century, we have a
bookseller in Baghdad who makes a catalog of all
the books he knows of in Arabic, and he
has thousands of books. And we know that he
missed many more books that he hadn't heard of
in Arabic. So, I mean, there's been a very
dramatic change. Arabic has become a language of high
culture, high civilization. So that's one central thing. Another
central thing, very obvious thing is, and when you
speak of Islamic civilization, Islam is absolutely central to
it. Um, I mean, I could make a kind
of contrast here and And if you take Western
civilization, You know, the foundation is what the Greeks
and Romans did, right? And, and then at a
later secondary stage, Christianity is imported into that civilization.
In the case of Islamic civilization, it's the other
way around. The civilization is built around Islam, and
later they will import the philosophy and science of
the Greeks and other peoples. So, and Islam is
very central. Um But I would say that I
mean, people sometimes get the idea that Islam is
everything in Islamic civilization, and it's not. I mean,
you know, I've just mentioned Greek philosophy and science
that is brought in through translation. But equally in
this civilization, People never cease to be fascinated by
pre-Islamic Arabia, pagan pre-Islamic Arabia, and they're endlessly fascinated
with its poetry. So that's something very un-Islamic that
is nevertheless a very central part of this civilization.
And equally You know, to qualify what I said
about the centrality of Arabic, we're going to, that's
going to change. You know, in the 100th century,
late 9th, 10th century, we start to get Persian
coming back as a literary language, written in Arabic
script. Uh, BUT then it now becomes a respectable
medium of culture in a way in which only
Arabic had been before that. So I mean, those
are the things that I think I would underline
most about Islamic civilization.
And uh in regards to the Islamic civilization, what
were the Islamic sciences and how did they come
about?
Right So in the first instance We have Muslim
revelation. That's the Quran, and that's the Hadith, you
know, the traditions about what the prophet said and
did. Um, AND each of those becomes the nucleus
of disciplines. Um, SCIENTIFIC scholarly disciplines. So for example,
with the Koran. Uh, YOU have the Koran there,
but what exactly should the text be? There are
variations, which is right or are they all right?
And that becomes an academic discipline for the early
Muslim scholars. And then, how exactly should you recite
the Quran? That's another discipline. What does God mean
in the Koran? Because often the Koran is not
very, you know, transparent, and, you know, you have
to interpret it. And that becomes another major scholarly
discipline. And it's the same with the hadith, with
the traditions about the prophet. And you have to
collect them. Initially, they're transmitted orally, then people start
to write them down, and then they start to
collect them in the late 8th century, the 9th
century. And I mean, collecting those traditions is a
discipline. And then, of course, there's interpreting those traditions.
That's another discipline. And then you get I mean,
with all that body of revelation, there are two
basic questions. What should we believe? What should we
do? And for what should we believe you have
a discipline that you can call theology. For what
should we do, you have a discipline that we
can call law. So in this way, that body
of revelation gives rise to this. Large number of
distinct and increasingly well developed disciplines.
So you in the book you also go through
the breakup of the caliphate in the west, which
includes Spain and North Africa, the East, Iran, and
the center, which includes the Fertile Crescent, Arabia, and
Egypt. In the interest of time, I will group
them together. Could you please tell us a little
bit about What led to each breakup, their aftermath,
and what characterized each region in terms of the
polities that then formed and how diverse they were.
Right. OK, I think the thing that is kind
of uniform in the background to all this is
that, you know, in any pre-modern, any state, when
the central government is weak, that creates opportunities for
provincial actors to increase their power at the expense
of the central government. And when the caliphate becomes
very weak, those are great opportunities. What is very
varied is who takes advantage of these opportunities. So
I'd say, I mean, let's just start in the
west. In Spain, we have this, in the 750s,
we have this Umayyad refugee prince, a refugee from
the Abbasid revolution. Uh, IF he stays in the,
in Syria, he'll get killed. He flees westwards, he
gets to Spain, and he succeeds in establishing a
dynasty of his own in Spain, a kind of
Umaya dynasty in exile that lasts into the 11th
century. Uh, SO that's one actor. Then we, let's
cross to North Africa, the western part of North
Africa. There we have all these Berber tribes, and
many of them have been converted by non-Sunni missionaries.
In other words, heretical, mostly Kharija. And they established
states. Karaite, also one important Shiite state. Um, SO
there we have a sectarian rebellion. And then if
we go to what's now Tunisia, we have another
pattern that's quite common. We have a governor appointed
by the Abbasids. But as the Abbasids weaken, he
becomes more powerful. He's able to do a deal
actually very early on, and he'll send tribute, and
they'll leave him alone. And so his, uh, you
know, his descendants then form a dynasty that lasts
for about a century, a bit over a century.
Um, I mean, that's the kind of thing that's
going on in the West, in the east, I
mean, some of it is very similar. Uh, YOU
have the same sectarian rebellions. We have Kharija, uh,
rebels in Sistan in sort of eastern Iran, and
they established some kind of Kharaja caliphate. Um, WE
have provincial governors who become more powerful, you know,
and found dynasties like the Tahlids and Samanids. Um,
WE don't have anything like the Umayyad prince, but
we have a couple of other things you don't
have in the West. And one of those is,
um, You have an anti-sectarian movement, a Sunni movement,
again in Sistan. They're against the Karaites. And in
the, in the later 9th century, they suddenly establish
a large state. And the ruler is, uh, I
mean, he's known as Yaqub the coppersmith. He's someone
who started right down at the bottom, but he's
made his way all the way up. He's now
a powerful ruler. And then one other thing is,
um, in the mountains in the north of Iran,
you have some people called the Dynamites, and they
come down from the mountains, many of them as
mercenaries, and they enlist in the armies of whoever
is ruling in different parts of Iran. And So
in a way, they're like the Swiss in Europe
who come down from the Swiss mountains. And become
mercenaries in Italy. Um, BUT there's one thing the
Swiss never do, which is to take over a
state in which they are mercenaries. Whereas the Dynamites
do exactly that. After a while, they realize that
they can take over from the existing dynasties, and
they found Dynamite dynasties. So Mm Opportunity created by
the weakness of the central government, and then a
great diversity of actors who take advantage of it.
Right, but why was there a decline in power
of the central government of the caliphate?
Right Now there's always lots of factors you can
bring in here like Bad rulers, we have the
Abbasid caliphate in the early decades of the 10th
century is a conspicuous example of that. Um, YOU
know, bad luck, all sorts of troubles. But I
think the really basic thing in the background is
that there seems to have been a catastrophic decline
in the revenue that the caliphate was getting from
the agricultural lands of Iraq. And that seems to
be not a failure of the tax collectors, but
a failure of agriculture itself. That increasingly, there was
a problem of agricultural land, going out of cultivation
because of the deposits of salt. This is always
a risk in Iraqi agriculture. Why exactly that happens
so much in the 9th century, I really don't
know. But it does seem to be the basic
factor behind the decay of the power of the
caliphate.
In our first interview we talked a little bit
about the Steppe peoples in the early stages of
the history of the Muslim world. In what ways
are the Turks, the Mongols, and other Steppe peoples
related to the history of the Muslim world?
Right, they certainly play a large role in it.
And Not so large until the 11th century. And
the main thing down to there is that uh
rulers in the Muslim world import Turkish slaves and
use them as soldiers, because, um, you know, they're
born cavalrymen. Um, BUT in the 11th century, what
we get in a sense, it's a bit like
the dynamites, that these Turks are coming into Iran
and enlisting in the armies of existing states. And
soon they realize that they can take over, and
they do that. And we get the Seljuk the
Seljuk Empire, which is a very large state. And
Then in the 13th century, we get the Mongols,
and that is as as the biggest expansion of
a steppe nomad people in the whole of history,
uh, an extraordinary event. Uh, AFTER that, the steps
play less role in the history of the Muslim
world. So it's mainly the Turks and the Mongols.
And in some ways, they're similar, they're step cavalry.
In other ways, they're very different. And one way
they're different is The Turks, when they come into
the, when they invade, they seem to be already
Muslims. So that their conquest, it's always unpleasant to
be conquered, but their conquest was less traumatic because
they were fellow Muslims. Whereas by contrast, the Mongols
arrived as pagans. And so that was much more
traumatic. Um, ANOTHER contrast kind of goes the other
way, that is, um, You know, the the Mongols.
Left no ethnic legacy in the Middle East. That's
to say, there's no population in the Middle East
that speaks Mongolian. For that we'd have to go
to Afghanistan. And But, um. By contrast, the Turks
have a tremendous ethnic impact in the Middle East.
We have several Turkish speaking populations in Iran. And
we have a massive Turkish speaking population in Anatolia,
in what's now Turkey. So that um I mean,
it's very striking that the country called Turkey should
be so far from the original homeland of the
Turks, whereas Mongolia is still where it started. Right.
Do we know if there were any Muslims in
China?
Yes, certainly there were Muslims in China, and they
got there by two routes. One was by sea.
Uh, WE know for a fact that by the
8th century, there were Muslim merchants in the port
cities of southern China. Um, BUT they don't appear
to have made any significant number of local converts.
We don't get any continuing Muslim community through that
commercial route to southern China. The other route, of
course, is over land. And I mean, as we
already know, um, conquest is a great help in
spreading a religion, but there is no Muslim conquest
of China. Uh, Timor in 1405 was planning one,
but he died before he could do it. Um,
BUT the conquest that does matter is the Mongol
conquest, and it's a pagan conquest, it's not a
Muslim conquest, but the Mongols, they like to collect
experts from all sorts of different peoples. And they're
not experts themselves. They need experts and they collect
them. And so there are jobs for Muslims in
China, when the Mongols take over there, particularly as
tax collectors, which makes them very unpopular, of course.
Nobody likes tax collectors. But um, You know, this
Muslim presence in China, and for example, um, Yeah,
I think the most successful single Muslim in China
was one who was appointed governor of Yunnan, you
know, down in the south southwest. And his descendants
are there to the present day. Um, AND, you
know, formed the sort of a part of the
elite of Yunnan down the centuries, um. So what
comes out of this is Muslims who were part
of the political elite under the Mongols. When the
Ming dynasty takes over, that's bad news for them.
But nevertheless, some, many of them do remain part
of the elite. And in contrast to how things
were under the Mongols, if you want to be
part of the elite in China under the Ming
and the Qing, you need to know your Confucian
classics. You need to have that Chinese elite culture.
And a lot of these Muslim families in eastern
China, they invest. In getting that elite culture. And
out of that comes a very curious and interesting
phenomenon, a literature in Chinese, which is devoted to
saying that Confucianism and Islam are compatible. They basically
say the same thing. That that's, you know, the
Muslim elite trying to feel comfortable in Confucian China.
Mhm.
How did the Muslim world during the so-called Middle
Ages compare to Europe?
Right, I think it really depends very much on
which part of the Middle Ages you take. So
I mean, if we take the early Middle Ages,
I mean, say, 8th, 9th, into the 10th century.
I would say that economically, the Muslim world is
much richer than, you know, the, the European Christian
European world. I'd also say that in cultural terms,
Uh, the Muslim world, Baghdad, Cairo, is a Baghdad
is a much more interesting place to be culturally
than anywhere in Europe at the time. You know,
in Europe at the time, um, Most culture is
in the monastery, most high culture is in the
monasteries, and mostly what they're doing is copying the
old books. Whereas by contrast in the, in the
Muslim world at the time, say, in Baghdad, you
have a very large educated lay population. Um, AND
they're interested in all sorts of things, and people
are writing about all sorts of things and disagreeing.
Um, YOU know, it's a much more lively scene
than you have in medieval Europe at the time.
By contrast, I mean, if you take the late
Middle Ages, we come to the 15th century. And
I don't think it's more the case that the,
you know, certainly the Middle Eastern part of the
Muslim world is richer. India is very rich, but
that's further over. Um, AND I would also say
that culturally, That difference that we had in the
early Middle Ages has been erased. And by the
15th century, you know, we're getting to the printing
press in Europe. And though people try to play
that down, the fact is it does lead to
an enormous cultural efflorescence, and you don't have an
equivalent of that in the Muslim world at the
time. So I think it all depends on when.
I would like to ask you now about the
Ottoman Empire. How was it formed and what territories
did it encompass?
Right. So the context for its formation is 14th
century Anatolia, what's now Turkey. And, and what you
have then in Anatolia is one, Muslim Turkish states,
many of them. Politically, the region is very fragmented.
And the Ottoman state is one of those fragments.
And then you have what is left of the
Byzantine Empire. Um, STILL with a little bit of
territory in Anatolia and a little bit of Balkan
territory. So that's the basic context, and the Ottomans.
They are exactly on the frontier between this Turkish
world and the Byzantine Empire, Byzantine Empire. And they
are extraordinarily energetic, and who knows why or how,
but they embark on a career of conquest that
lasts for centuries. Uh, THEY go east, and they
take over all those Turkish states. You know, they
go as far as um territory that had been
effectively part of Iran and now becomes sort of
Turkish territory. Uh, THEY'RE going west into the Balkans.
CONQUERING large territories up to and including a large
part of Hungary. Um, AND that that's in the
14th, 15, 15th centuries. Uh, AND in the 15th
century, they take Constantinople, which becomes the capital, Istanbul.
And then in the 16th century, they go south,
and they take over most of the Arab lands
in Asia and Africa. And now, Morocco remains independent.
Uh, Oman remains independent, but I mean, even Yemen
is conquered for a while by the Ottomans. So,
I mean, that's the basic picture of this state
that lasts from the 14th century into the 20th.
Did the Ottoman Empire have distinctive features when compared
to other empires in history?
Right I, I think the single most distinctive thing
really is the Janissaries. Um, I mean, the fact
that their infantry is not very distinctive. This is
a period in which the infantry is coming back
in warfare as against cavalry. The fact that they're
slaves is not very distinctive in the Muslim world.
We had that already back in a big way
in the 9th century. Um, BUT what is unique
about them is that the Ottoman state is recruiting
the Janissaries by enslaving Christian peasants. They go to
the Christian villages, especially in the Balkans, and they
take boys from there, take them to Istanbul, and
then they, they put them out to learn Turkish
in the countryside, and then they train them, and
they, that becomes the core of the Ottoman army.
So that's one thing that's very, that's unique about
the Jansis, I think. And the other thing that
is at least very surprising, I don't know of
a parallel, is that um in religious terms, you
would think that the Janissaries would be very solid
Sunnis. That's how they're brought up, once they're brought
to, to into the empire into to Istanbul. But
they're not. They take up with A Sufi order,
the Bektashis. And the Bektashis, they're one of these
Sufi orders that has, they have wild ideas, and
they do wild things, like they have something like
a communion service where they serve wine. You know,
this has strong Christian resonance. It's very un-Islamic. Um,
THEY'RE also very friendly to Christians. Sometimes they will
let Christians join the brotherhood without even converting to
Islam. And the Janissaries take this up. Maybe in
some way it resonates with their Christian roots. I
don't know. But you have kind of a very
orthodox Sunni state. With a heterodox cop to its
army, which is at least strange and interesting.
So you mentioned Christians very briefly there. How did
Christians relate to Muslims in the Ottoman Empire? How
did the empire treat its Christian subjects?
Right. Well, let's take this first, I mean, in
principle. So in principle you have two completely distinct
communities. Muslims and Christians, the Muslims are on the
inside track because they share the religion of the
state. The Christians are on the outside track, and
a clear indication of that is, well, one indication
would be taxation. Christians pay a tax, the jizya,
that Muslims do not pay. So there's clear fiscal
discrimination, if you like. And another would be that
The janissaries apart. There's no way a Christian could
get a job, say, in the bureaucracy. That's for
Muslims. Um, SO basically, I mean, that's the picture
in principle. In practice, yes, it's a bit like
that, but not completely. So that, uh, for one
thing, um, some Christians are very successful, like, you
can be appointed governor of Christian principalities in Moldavia,
Wallachia, Wallachia in what's now Romania, or close to
it. And, you know, these are tributary states. At
first they have their own dynasties, but later the
Ottomans get rid of the dynasties, and instead they
appoint Greeks from Istanbul to govern them. So if
you become a governor of Moldavia, you're doing very
well as a Christian. And the other thing is
that You know, Christianity and Islam are supposed to
be quite separate, but they bleed into each other,
especially at a popular level. So that you have
things, they're really quite exotic things like, um, well,
the Bektashis are part of that picture. I described
that. And then if you go to Albania, and
you find them Albanian clans, where In winter, they're
down in the plains, and they're Muslims. In summer,
they go up into the mountains and they're Christians.
You also have families, which will bring up the
boys as Muslims and the girls as Christians. You
know, there's a lot of quite exotic sort of
inter intermixing of the two religions at a popular
level. So you have to qualify the in principle
picture. Mhm mhm.
When and how did the Ottoman Empire come to
an end?
Right, it comes to an end. Well, I mean,
already in the 18th century, the Ottoman Empire. IS
kind of becoming a bit unsustainable. And it's a
poor empire, and it confronts rich and militarily powerful
enemies. And In the 19th century, that is going
to lead to recurrent losses of territory, but actually
it starts in the later 18th century and it
continues into the 20th century. Uh, VERY significantly, in
the 19th century, the Ottoman Empire could well have
disappeared if the British had not been there to
prop it up against the Russians. The, the British
regard it as in their geopolitical interest to keep
the empire in existence. And then we come down
to the First World War, and that's really the
death blow. I mean, the Ottomans, they have a
horrible dilemma when Europe is moving towards the First
World War. If they stay neutral, they will not
be present at the peace conference. I mean, everybody
expects that the, you know, the European powers are
going to fight each other for a bit, and
then they'll negotiate, and they'll have a peace conference
in some European city. And if the Ottomans are
neutral, they won't be invited. And if they're not
at the table, they'll be on the menu, as
they say in Washington, um, you know, so that
European powers will be taking more Ottoman territory. So
what they do is they want to join in.
No European power is enthusiastic about taking them, but
eventually the Germans take them on, so they become
a German ally. And that turns out very badly
when the war ends 4 years later, with total
defeat on one side, total victory on the other
side, and the Ottomans are on the losing side.
And So then they're going to be carved up.
And what you get then is a remarkable resurgence
of part of the Ottoman elite. The Turkish nationalists,
as we call them, and they managed to carve
out a much larger Bit of the central Ottoman
territory than you could have expected, given the result
of the First World War. And And they're able
to secure their boundaries, and the European powers go
away. And they could in principle have continued to
call that the Ottoman Empire. In fact, they don't.
They say this is not the Ottoman Empire anymore,
this is Turkey, and that's how we get the
country of Turkey. Mhm.
So uh in regards to India and the presence
of Muslims there, I know there's also a very
rich history there, but in the interest of time
I will just ask you a few questions. So
first, how was India like in terms of political
organization before the arrival of Muslims?
Right. I mean, India's not like China, where you
typically have empires most of the time, uh, and
there's no state that rules the whole of India
until the British. Um, YOU do have empires from
time to time. Uh, BEFORE the rise of Islam
and after. But, um, at the, at the time
when the Muslims first, the Arabs come to India
in the early 8th century, there's no empire there,
so that India is politically fragmented.
Do Muslims relate to the Mughal Empire in any
way?
Certainly, very strongly. I mean, of course, calling the
empire the Mughal Empire, that has a kind of
pagan smell to it. You know, that's the Mughals,
that's the Mongols. And, you know, you're thinking back
to Chinghiz Khan. But the fact of the matter
is that the Mughal Empire is the most powerful
Muslim state. Ever in India. And the decline of
the Mughal Empire in the 18th century was very
bad news for Muslims. The abolition of the empire
by the British of what was left, the shadow
of the empire in 1858, and that was a
very severe symbolic loss for the Muslims of India.
Uh, SO that, I mean, this naturally is a
past with which they identify. And a past in
which they take pride. But um, I mean, here,
we're sort of going beyond our limits, but, um,
you know, in the early 20th century, the Indian
Muslims are making a very big deal of the
Ottoman Caliphate. They become kind of fixated on the
Ottoman Caliphate. And, and they're very upset when the
Ottoman caliphate comes to an end in the 1920s.
And that there's a kind of desperation there, if
they had still had a kind of shadow Muslim
Mughal emperor, maybe that could have been a focus
for political activity against the British. Like in Morocco,
where the French keep the Moroccan Sultan, they don't
abolish the sultanate, and the Moroccan Sultan then becomes
an important figure in the nationalist movement against the
French. Nothing like that in India.
How did Muslims and Hindus relate to one another?
Right. And I think what you have to say
there is that it's extremely varied, but I mean,
there are two extremes. At one extreme, the Muslims
may be destroying Hindu temples right and left. And
at the other extreme, everybody is getting along very
happily. And then, you know, the Muslim zealots, they
can of course, quote from Revelation, uh, in a
sense, they have an Islamic rectitude on their side.
Uh, AND you do get a lot of Muslim
zealotry in India. But on the other hand, whenever
you have two populations side by side, I mean,
total hostility is something you can't, you can't live
with that indefinitely. So you're going to get accommodations.
And then these accommodations spring up and, you know,
you have things like just as in the Ottoman
Empire at a popular level, Islam and Christian and
Hinduism are bleeding into each other. Um, YOU know,
so that you have shrines, where both Hindus and
Muslims worship. And, you have a, a medieval, he's
undateable, but a medieval religious figure, who you can
call him a Sufi Muslim, or you can call
him a Vaishnavite Hindu. It's it's up to you.
Um And he writes poetry in which he trashes
the Koran and he trashes the Brahmins. And when
he dies, according to the story, uh, There's a
quarrel between his Muslim and his Christian followers as
to who gets the body to bury or burn.
And miraculously, two bodies appear, and the Muslims take
one and bury it, and the Christians take the
other and burn it. Um, YOU know, so you're
getting a whole spectrum. Mhm.
How about Southeast Asia? How did the Muslims get
there and did they have a very big presence
there?
Right, now then. They must have been there already,
at least by the 8th century, since we know
that there were Muslim merchants in China, um, who
had come by sea, and there's no way they
could come by sea except going through Southeast Asia.
But, well, maybe one thing about merchants is that
while they can lead to conversion to their religion,
it's going to be very slow. They don't have
the kind of authority and power of conquerors. Um,
SO maybe that's why it's not until the late
13th century that we first hear about Muslim communities
in Southeast Asia, as opposed to just merchants passing
through. But from that point on, they're definitely there.
And Islam keeps expanding. And, you know, initially, what
we're dealing with is a typically Indian Ocean phenomenon
of Islam spread by merchants on the coast, but
not spreading to the interior. But then gradually, at
least in some, some of the islands in the
Malay Peninsula, it begins to spread to the interior.
So for example, Java becomes Muslim, you know, all
the way. Um, YOU also, it's, it spreads well
beyond the rim of the Indian Ocean, in fact,
to the rim of the Pacific, so that you
get Muslims in Halmahera and Mindanao, and, you know,
the very extreme western tip of New Guinea. So
we're getting a large Muslim presence. And over time,
it becomes larger and larger, except in the Philippines,
where the Spanish arrest its expansion and promote Catholicism.
But otherwise, and we're getting a popular, I mean,
It's no accident that at the present day, Indonesia
is the country with the largest Muslim population anywhere.
Mhm. So those merchants in the end had a
very considerable impact.
In Africa, how did things, things play out? How
far did Muslims spread and how did local societies
look like?
Right. So I mean, Africa is a very big
place, so naturally we have diverse scenes. Um, AND
we have the East African coast, I already mentioned
that, uh. You go to the Upper Nilelo south
of that, and you have, at the beginning of
our of in the early Islamic period, you have
Christian Nubia and Christian Ethiopia. Christian Ethiopia is still
there, but Christian Nubia is not. That becomes entirely
Muslim territory. And, further west, you have the savannah.
Uh, YOU know, the, um, the grasslands south of
the Sahara Desert. Uh, I reckon that, and my
guess is that in before the rise of Islam,
what you had there was Pagan African states that
had little or no contact with the world, the
other side of the Sahara. But uh somehow one
of the effects of the rise of Islam is
that the Sahara opens up. I mean, it's a
horrible desert to cross, but merchants now start to
cross it in considerable numbers. And, you know, there
are commercial profits to be made that make it
worthwhile. Um, AND so you get these Muslim merchants
coming down into the savannah. Uh, WE get an
early picture of that from a geographer writing in
the 11th century. Uh, YOU have a pagan African
kingdom in the savannah. Uh, AND the king has
his pagan capital. But a few miles away, there's
a Muslim town where the merchants live. And there
they have their own Muslim judges, you know, they're
leading a fully Muslim way of life, and the
two are interacting. And the king also, um, he
values Muslims. Uh, YOU know, it's, again, it's the
question of like, just as the Mongols like experts,
the king of, of Ghana, in this case, likes
experts. So that the Muslims, they, they're literate, they're
numerate, they can handle the fiscal administration. And, and
then gradually, Islam spreads more in different ways in
different places until you end up with actual Muslim
states, like in Mali, which even Batuta, the, you
know, the Moroccan traveler visited in the 14th century.
And the way he describes it, yes, and Mali
is a Muslim state with a Muslim population. In
some ways, he says they're very good Muslims. Like,
for example, er, people force their children to learn
the Quran by heart, and the children are lazy
learning the Quran. They put fetters on them to
punish them. And even Battuta thinks this is very
good. On the other hand, you still get uh
girls wandering around naked. Uh, SLAVE girls wander around
naked, but it's not just slave girls. Uh, THE
daughter of the ruler of Mali, uh, she goes
around populace, and, and, you know, all that is
extremely shocking to even Batuta. So what we get
there is a kind of snapshot of society that
is in some ways very Muslim, and in some
ways still very pagan, you could say. And gradually
things are consolidated until the savannah becomes a solidly
Muslim territory.
Finally, let me ask you a few questions about
the Muslim world in the present day. Which countries
or areas of the globe does it encompass? Which
parts of the globe and which countries would you
say are part of the Muslim world?
Right. Um, Yeah, I would say the Muslim world
is confined to Eurasia. NOT Eurasia and Africa, to
the old world. Uh, OUTSIDE the old world, what
you get is Muslim diasporas, and they, they can
be quite important and quite large. Uh, BUT we
don't have a Muslim majority country outside the old
world. In the old world, it's a very large
phenomenon, but we have the northern half of Africa,
with the exception of Ethiopia. We have the Middle
East, with the exception of some of Transcaucasian, Armenia,
Georgia. Um, WE have Central Asia, but not Inner
Asia. Inner Asia, you know, the Mongols go Buddhist.
Uh, IN South Asia, we have You know, significant
territories in the northwest and northeast. Um, AND then
in Southeast Asia, yes, in Southeast Asia, it's the
islands and the Malay Peninsula, maritime Southeast Asia, but
not the mainland. The mainland, it's a matter of
Muslim minorities. And yeah, and that's the basic picture.
Mhm. What are the biggest changes in the Muslim
world that occurred over the past two centuries?
Right. I would say. First and most, perhaps most
obviously, you have the rise of non-Muslim power at
the expense of Muslim power in the world. Uh,
WHEREBY, you know, Europe, which mostly in the Middle
Ages It was not a serious threat to Muslims,
certainly, certainly in the early Middle Ages. And by
the time you get to the 18th century, that
has changed, and it's changed even more in the
19th century. And At first it's European powers. Then
it's of course the United States of America, an
offshoot of Europe. And now increasingly it's also China.
And all these are large, militarily powerful states outside
the Muslim world. Whereas by contrast, in the Muslim
world, if you think about it at the present
day, There is no giant state. There is no
really large state, uh, nothing like the United States
or Brazil or India, or what have you. Um.
So that there's a very real turning of the
balance of power against the Muslim world. So that's
one thing. And then the second thing, and it
goes with that, is The need for Muslim states
and societies to take over many aspects of Western
civilization. In the future, it could be whatever the
Chinese do, we'll see. Um And so that, uh,
you know, in the Middle East today. IS more
recognizable visually, so to speak, to a European than
it would be to a Muslim of the 18th
century. You know, the architecture, apart from symbolic architecture,
the architecture is Western, uh, books look like Western
books, not like traditional Muslim manuscripts. Um, ARMIES basically
are on the Western model, not on pre-modern Muslim
models, etc. ETC. I mean Alongside the invasion of
political and military power, there's been an invasion of
culture. And economics on a large scale. What would
I add to that? Well, two things that are
certainly related to Western dominance of the world, and
the West becoming a kind of model, and Well,
one is. A great increase in the size of
populations. I think that would not have happened without
Western public medicine. So that, I mean, the population
of Muslim countries is now typically greater by an
order of magnitude, at least now than it was
in the 18th century. And another thing, the last
thing I'll throw in here is increasing literacy in
the population at large. You know, so far as
we can judge, um, in the 19th century, uh,
literacy rates in the Muslim world were mostly in
single figures. Today, I think there's no Muslim country
that doesn't have A majority of the population, at
least somewhat literate. It's a very dramatic change, and
it has, of course, important cultural implications. Mhm
What would you say has been the impact of
Western countries on the Middle East,
particularly in the Middle East. So again, Western power
is the most conspicuous thing. Uh The British and
the French ruled significant parts of the Middle East,
not for as long as the British ruled India
or the French ruled Algeria, but still for significant
periods. You could also say that the, the Russians
took part of the Middle East up in the
north, Transcaucasia, and in the case of Azerbaijan, that's
a Muslim territory. Um. Yeah, alongside that kind of
direct rule. By European countries you have indirect hegemony.
And I think For a while, that is something
the British had. In parts of the Middle East,
they didn't actually rule. Um, IT'S now something that
America has. And what we've recently been seeing in
the Middle East is a rather dramatic example of
that. And And then of course I mean the
the cultural side of it that I was talking
about before. Uh, WHEREBY, um, I mean, if you
go to Lebanon, uh, the elite is still to
a considerable extent French speaking. Whereas the world over,
English has become kind of the second language of
elites. Uh, SO the French stamp is still left
there to a lesser extent in Syria. Um, THE
British in Egypt. But there, of course, the Egyptians
got very friendly with the French, just because they
were being ruled by the British. So there's French
influence there too. Yeah, a lot of influence by
European countries.
Does the history of the Muslim world help us
understand the current state of the Middle East in
any way?
Right, I think if you knew nothing about the
history of the Muslim world, then you would find
the state of the Middle East very puzzling. But
that doesn't mean that, um, knowing the history would
enable you to predict what happens in the Middle
East. No, I mean, Uh, there's too much, uh,
that is a matter of accident. Uh, THERE'S of
luck. There is too much that is a matter
of external actors, as we see just now in
the Middle East. Um, I mean, if you ask
the question, why is there a state of Israel
in the Middle East, you can't answer that question
without talking about the Russian Empire in Eastern Europe,
and the British Empire and the Palestinian mandate. And
And certainly, yeah, I'm. The history of the Middle
East is fundamentalist background. Is it more than background?
Well, let me give you just one thought here.
Uh, IF we look at the war that's going
on or maybe has stopped, just stopped in the
Middle East at the moment. Um, ONE question you
might ask is, why does Iran regard Israel as
its great as one of its greatest enemies? Because
in geopolitical terms, that makes no sense. In geopolitical
terms, unless you're an imperial power like America. You
quarrel with your neighbors. And the people on the
other side of their neighbors are allies against your
neighbors. Now that pattern we don't see in the
Middle East. And I think you can't understand it
without the Islamic dimension. That is to say, one,
that from, you know, an Islamic viewpoint, Being the
enemy of Israel looks good. So that helps Iran
to look good in the Middle East. And 2,
Iran In the 16th century became a Shiite country.
And that means it's liable to be a kind
of pariah country. IN a a largely Sunni world.
And one of the ways in which Iran can
try to escape this pariah status. IS by being
against Israel. They can say to the Sunnis, look,
you're not doing a good job against Israel, but
we are. And I think that is at least
part of the explanation for this, the hostility of
Iran to Israel.
Mhm. So I have one last question then, and
in our first conversation we started by discussing what
Islam is, and now I would like to ask
you, what are Sunni and Shia Muslims and what
is the divide based on?
Right, so I mean this is a sectarian division
just as Catholics and Protestants is a sectarian division.
In that sense, it's very easily understood. Uh, WHAT
does it actually go back to? Uh, IT goes
back to the succession to the Prophet Muhammad. So
in 632, I mean, looking back on what happened
in 632 when the prophet died, if you're a
Sunni, you say, yes, the Muslim community did right
to appoint Abu Bakr as successor to the prophet,
and then Omar as his successor, then Osthman as
his successor, and then Ali. As Uthman's successor. Whereas
if you're a Shiite, You say no. Abu Bakr,
Omar, and Othman were usurpers. They had no business
becoming caliphs. The caliph should have been Ali right
from the start, from 632. Not waiting his turn
until 6:56. So you have that fundamental disagreement over
which a civil war was fought in the 650s.
Now, I mean, that kind of disagreement can either
disappear. Or it can be taken up and elaborated.
And it's elaboration that happens. Um, YOU know, what
happens is that other things then crystallize around this
basic political difference. So, for example, um, you know,
Shiite theology is significantly different from Sunni theology. Uh,
I mean, crudely speaking, the Shiites believe in free
will. Whereas the Sunnis believe in predestination. And Shiite
law is significantly different from Sunni law. For example,
in Sunni law, a man cannot have a free
concubine. He can have a slave concubine, but not
a free woman as concubine. If he wants a
free woman, he has to marry her. By contrast,
in Shiite law, you can have free concubines. So
that say an elite Member, a member of the
elite in Iran. As a Shiite. Could take a
concubine from the lower class. Uh, AND in English,
people sometimes call this temporary marriage. Um, IT'S a
temporary arrangement and it's not actually marriage. So I
mean, that's a significant difference that affects everyday life
between Sunni and Shiite law. And then perhaps most
important is Mm And Sunniism and Shiism. Have very
different, if you might say, emotional repertoires. And what's
striking about Shiism is a sense of loss, of
injustice, of of having been oppressed and repressed. Um,
A sense of feeling sorry for yourself, you could
say. And, and that whole emotional repertoire is really
not part of Sunniism.
Right. OK, so the book is again a history
of the Muslim world from its origins to the
dawn of modernity. Of course, I'm leaving a link
to it in the description of the interview and
Doctor Cook, thank you so much for taking the
time to come on the show again. It's been
a very interesting conversation.
And thank you, I enjoyed it very much.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at enlights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Muller, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingbird, Arnaud Wolff, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forst Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and
Hal Herzognun, Machael Jonathan Labrarith, John Yardston, and Samuel
Curric Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezaraujo Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alekbaka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov, Zal
Adrian Yei Poltontin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall,
Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti, Gabriel Pancortez or
Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sony Smith, and
Wisman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno, Luke
Lovai, Georgios Theophannus, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David Williams,
Dio Costa, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie
Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee Jr.
Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert Grassy,
Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark Kempel,
Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin
Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensleyman.
George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van Goler,
Alexander Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular,
Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov, Sean
Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special thanks
to my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank Lucas Stink,
Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas Trumbull,
Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlo Montenegro, Al Nick
Cortiz, and Nick Golden, and to my executive producers,
Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie. Thank
you for all.